# The Texting Wilde Project

The Anglo-Irish writer Oscar Wilde (1854-1900), famous as an iconoclastic thinker, wit, media celebrity and gay martyr, continues to be a perennial favorite for biographical treatments. Our knowledge of ‘Oscar Wilde,’ however, is not comprised of a corpus of pure and simple facts that allows us an unmediated apprehension of a real person separated from us only by time, but rather this knowledge is comprised of a densely complex and often contradictory accretion of texts created in that intervening time that constitutes the only Wilde we can know. Many of the ‘facts’ of Wilde’s life originated as narrative elements within particular textual and contextual moments and have acquired factive status through their repetition without attribution or with misattribution in text after text, losing in the process of this continual redeployment their textual provenance, a situation, given the volume and variety of material to be mastered, that has frustrated what might be characterized as an exegetical analysis of Wilde biography. 

Consequently, the aim of the Texting Wilde Project (TWP) is to explore and develop the use of text encoding combined with  computer-assisted methods for the identification and analysis of common types of content and textual structures that occur across and interconnect large corpora of life-writing texts relating to an individual or network of persons. It is developing these methods through the creation of a corpus of texts relevant to early (pre-1945) Wilde biography, prepared in such a way as to be tractable to computer-assisted methods of analysis. The first period of Wilde’s posthumous biography—from Wilde’s death in 1900 to his censorious and litigious former lover Lord Alfred Douglas’s death in 1945 (which ushered in a new openness in treatments of Wilde's sexuality)—was formative because during that time the majority of primary accounts were created either by persons who had personally known Wilde (or who could convincingly claim a personal acquaintance) or who had access to persons who had personally known Wilde. However, since post-1945 biographical and other studies of Wilde are interested in early accounts primarily as sources to be plundered for ‘factual’ information, the complicated and conflicted history of their writing, publication, and reception has largely been ignored and obscured. Such ‘fact-grubbing’ often results in the context in which these ‘facts’ were initially employed being lost. To isolate a fact from the context in which it was articulated is to sever it from its history, which in many cases is essential for an evaluation of the degree to which it partakes of the factual. By returning to early biographical treatments of Wilde, not as sites of reusable facts, but as links in a genealogy of a biographical discourse of Wilde, we can begin to understand the extent to which contemporary interpretations are shaped by the early struggles over Wilde’s representation.

For more information:

[Texting Wilde Project page, Centre for Digital Humanities] (https://www.torontomu.ca/centre-digital-humanities/projects/texting-wilde/)
